RFC process proposal (#1)
bytecodealliance/rfcs: accepted/rfc-process.md

# RFC process for the Bytecode Alliance

# Summary

> As the Bytecode Alliance grows, we need more formalized ways of communicating about and reaching consensus on major changes to core projects. This document proposes to adapt ideas from Rust’s [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/) and [MCP](https://forge.rust-lang.org/compiler/mcp.html) processes to the Bytecode Alliance context.

Reviewer: There's a formal proposal for the MCP process at https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2936/ ; I would suggest linking to that.

Also, please expand "RFC" and "MCP" on first use.

Author: I'll expand the acronyms :+1:

Re: the MCP link, I'd prefer to keep it pointed at the official documentation on the Forge, which post-dates the compiler team RFC (which was accepted a while back).

# Motivation

There are two primary motivations for creating an RFC process for the Bytecode Alliance:

*   **Coordination with stakeholders**. Core BA projects have a growing set of stakeholders building on top of the projects, but not necessarily closely involved in day-to-day development. This group will only grow as the BA brings on more members. An RFC process makes it easier to communicate _possible major changes_ that stakeholders may care about, and gives them a chance to weigh in.

*   **Coordination within a project**. As the BA grows, we hope and expect that projects will be actively developed by multiple organizations, rather than just by a “home” organization. While day-to-day activity can be handled through issues, pull requests, and regular meetings, having a dedicated RFC venue makes it easier to separate out discussions with far-ranging consequences that all project developers may have an interest in.

# Proposal

> The design of this RFC process draws ideas from Rust’s [RFC](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/) and [MCP](https://forge.rust-lang.org/compiler/mcp.html) processes, adapting to the BA and trying to keep things lightweight.

Reviewer: Same comment as in the summary about where MCP links to.

## Stakeholders

Each core BA project has a formal set of **stakeholders**. These are individuals, organized into groups by project and/or member organization. Stakeholders can block proposals, and conversely having explicit sign-off from at least one individual within each stakeholder group is a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for immediately accepting a proposal.

> The process for determining core BA projects and their stakeholder set will ultimately be defined by the Technical Steering Committee, once it is in place. Until then, the current BA Steering Committee will be responsible for creating a provisional stakeholder arrangement, as well as deciding whether to accept this RFC.

Reviewer: Do we expect the stakeholder set to be completely unbounded in number? If so, can we say that explicitly? If not, how do we handle that?

Author: I'm not sure what you have in mind about "unbounded in number" here. I don't foresee a hard limit on the stakeholder count, but rather a policy around stakeholders that naturally results in a reasonable upper bound in practice. For example, a likely criterion for formal stakeholdership is being a major contributor to the project itself, a number which is likely to be self-limiting for other reasons.

All that said, I'm also wary of trying to specify too much about the stakeholder determination in this RFC, preferring to treat it as a modular detail ultimately owned by the TSC.

## Structure and workflow

### Creating and discussing an RFC

*   We have a dedicated bytecodealliance/rfcs repo that houses _all_ RFCs for core BA projects, much like Rust’s rfcs repo that is shared between all Rust teams. 
*   The rfcs repo will be structured similarly to the one in Rust:

>     *   A template markdown file laying out the format of RFCs, like [Rust’s](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/0000-template.md) but simplified.

Reviewer: I would suggest that our process should take inspiration from the current direction of Rust processes, and start with a more MCP-like template (focused on the problem statement and not just the proposal). There may also be value in adopting the processes for assigning a *liaison*, and having the option of designating a *project group* to shepherd complex proposals.

Author: So, it seems like a point of confusion here is that there are _multiple_ notions of "MCP" in flight in the Rust community. There's the existing one for the Compiler team, which doesn't even have a problem statement section, and the one in the works for the language team.

I think what'd be helpful here is to get more concrete: is there something about the template, or some other part of the process, that is underemphasizing writing about the motivation?

Note also that there's an explicit separate template for early-stage ("draft") RFCs that pretty closely resembles the proposed Rust Lang Team MCP template.

re: liaisons and project groups, my feeling is that we are probably too early on in the BA for those ideas to apply well. (In particular, the total group of people writing or consuming RFCs is likely to be quite small at the outset, compared to where Rust was even back at the 1.0 days). I suspect that we'll want to evolve the RFC process over time as the unique needs of the BA become more clear.

    *   A subdirectory holding the text of all accepted RFCs, like [Rust’s](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/tree/master/text).
*   New RFCs are submitted via pull request, and both technical and process discussion happens via the comment thread.

> *   The RFC is tagged with a **project label**, corresponding to the BA project it targets. This tagging informs tooling about the relevant stakeholder set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   The RFC is tagged with **project labels**, corresponding to the BA project or projects it targets. This tagging informs tooling about the relevant stakeholder set.
```

### Making a decision: merge or close

> *   When discussion has stabilized around the main points of contention, any stakeholder can make a **motion to finalize**, using a special comment syntax understood by tooling. This motion comes with a disposition: merge or close.

Reviewer: I do think these two dispositions suffice, but given that, we should say something like "closing an RFC does not imply a refusal to reconsider it in the future if new information arises; a motion to postpone will also use the disposition 'close', along with an explanation.".

*   In response to the motion to finalize, a bot will post a special comment with a **stakeholder checklist**. 
    *   This list includes the GitHub handle for each individual stakeholder, organized into stakeholder groups. 

>     *   The individual who filed the motion to finalize is automatically checked off.

Reviewer: You might mention, somewhere in this proposal, that we may be able to use Rust's rfcbot for this. (In general, I think it's important for proposals that assume certain technological support to be clear on whether that support is already mostly written or would need to be written.)

> *   Once _any_ stakeholder from a _different_ group has signed off, the RFC will move into a 10 day **final comment period** (FCP), long enough to ensure that other stakeholders have at least a full business week to respond.

Reviewer: I like this very much; it's a good balance between "FCP starts right away" and "FCP doesn't start until almost everyone has signed off". It seems like a good fit given the other changes we've made to the process.

*   During FCP, any stakeholder can raise an **objection** using a syntax understood by the bot. Doing so aborts FCP and labels the RFC as `blocked-by-stakeholder` until the objection is formally resolved (again using a special comment syntax).
*   Finally, the RFC is automatically merged/close if either:
    *   The FCP elapses without any objections.
    *   A stakeholder from _each_ group has signed off, short-cutting the waiting period.

## What goes into an RFC?

RFCs will follow a format inspired by Rust, but significantly simplified. RFCs are markdown files containing the following sections (which will be laid out in a template file):

*   **Summary**. A ~one paragraph overview of the RFC.
*   **Motivation**. What problem does the RFC solve?
*   **Proposal**. The meat of the RFC.
*   **Rationale and alternatives**. A discussion of tradeoffs: why was the proposal chosen, rather than alternatives?

> *   **Open questions**. Often an RFC is initially created with a broad proposal but some gaps that need community input to fill in.

Reviewer: As stated above, I think there's value in adopting something closer to the MCP process (focused on the problem rather than a specific propsal) rather than the RFC process, and letting a full RFC come later if and when needed. We may want to have both options. That way, we have a way to charter a group to solve a given problem for which the solution is not predetermined.

### Draft RFCs

It is encouraged to use the RFC process to discuss ideas early in the design phase, before a _full_ proposal is ready. Such RFCs should be marked as [a draft PR](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-requests#draft-pull-requests), and contain the following sections:

*   **Motivation**. What problem are you ultimately hoping to solve?
*   **Proposal sketch**. At least a short sketch of a possible approach. Beginning discussion without _any_ proposal tends to be unproductive.

> *   **Open questions**. This section is especially important for draft RFCs: it’s where you highlight the key issues you are hoping that discussion will address.

Reviewer: Ah, I see. Is this intended to be closer to the MCP?

I think there'd be value in explaining this first, suggesting that almost all proposals should start with this, and then explaining the format of a full RFC second.

RFCs cannot be merged in draft form. Before any motion to merge, the draft should be revised to include all required RFC sections, and the PR should be changed to a standard GitHub PR.

## What requires an RFC?

When should you open an RFC, rather than just writing code and opening a traditional PR?

*   When the work involves changes that will significantly affect stakeholders or project contributors. Each project may provide more specific guidance. Examples include:
    *   Major architectural changes
    *   Major new features
    *   Simple changes that have significant downstream impact

>     *   Changes that could affect guarantees or level of support, e.g. removing support for a target platform

Reviewer: Or adding support for a platform with the expectation that it must be maintained going forward.

# Motivation

There are two primary motivations for creating an RFC process for the Bytecode Alliance:

*   **Coordination with stakeholders**. Core BA projects have a growing set of stakeholders using and contributing to foundational projects, often from varied organizations or teams. An RFC process makes it easier to communicate _possible major changes_ that stakeholders may care about, and gives them a chance to weigh in.

*   **Coordination within a project**. As the BA grows, we hope and expect that projects will be actively developed by multiple organizations, rather than just by a “home” organization. While day-to-day activity can be handled through issues, pull requests, and regular meetings, having a dedicated RFC venue makes it easier to separate out discussions with far-ranging consequences that all project developers may have an interest in.

# Proposal

> The design of this RFC process draws ideas from Rust’s [Request for Comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/) (RFC) and [Major Change Proposal](https://forge.rust-lang.org/compiler/mcp.html) (MCP) processes, adapting to the BA and trying to keep things lightweight.

Reviewer 2: Is it expected for this process to deviate from Rust's one? In case of if either process changes, the statements "like Rust's" or "similarly to the one in Rust" might become incorrect. Is it possible to point this proposal to specific version of Rust's RFC process?

Reviewer 3: Good point that those processes might change, and that these references might become stale as a result. I think that that's fine though, since over time it'll also become less important to be able to anchor expectations to related processes in other communities. But we could certainly include more stable links here; would you be up for looking them up, @yurydelendik?

### Draft RFCs

It is encouraged to use the RFC process to discuss ideas early in the design phase, before a _full_ proposal is ready. Such RFCs should be marked as [a draft PR](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-requests#draft-pull-requests), and contain a markdown file with the following sections:

*   **Motivation**. What problem are you ultimately hoping to solve?
*   **Proposal sketch**. At least a short sketch of a possible approach. Beginning discussion without _any_ proposal tends to be unproductive.
*   **Open questions**. This section is especially important for draft RFCs: it’s where you highlight the key issues you are hoping that discussion will address.

RFCs cannot be merged in draft form. Before any motion to merge, the draft should be revised to include all required RFC sections, and the PR should be changed to a standard GitHub PR.

### Full RFCs

Full RFCs are markdown files containing the following sections (which will be laid out in a template file):

*   **Summary**. A ~one paragraph overview of the RFC.
*   **Motivation**. What problem does the RFC solve?
*   **Proposal**. The meat of the RFC.

> *   **Rationale and alternatives**. A discussion of tradeoffs: why was the proposal chosen, rather than alternatives?

Reviewer 4: Where would risk assessments go? Should a proposal address some pain point, at the cost of potentially introducing other problems, one needs to elaborate the latter, and weigh in on their severity. One could argue that this belongs into the discussion of the proposal, but that thread is not a document.

Reviewer 3: The intent was to have risk assessment be covered by this section, but I agree that it's a bit implicit. I see you've signed off by now (thank you!), but do you think it'd be strongly preferable to address this now? To me it seems like we can include this in a future revision after we learn a bit more about the process in practice.

Reviewer 4: No need to get into it right now. Let's wait for a fine-tuning revision, and get some phrasing in then.

Reviewer 3: I filed #7 to track this.

A common complaint about the Rust RFC process is that it is, in some ways, a victim of its own success: RFC comment threads can quickly become overwhelming. While this may eventually become an issue for the BA as well, we have some additional recourse in this proposal: we have a clear stakeholder model which will allow us to prioritize concerns from stakeholders, and take action when individuals who are not formal stakeholders overwhelm comment threads.

We could instead follow Rust’s MCP model and use Zulip streams for RFC discussion. However, that introduces a more complex workflow (spanning multiple systems) and leaves a less permanent and less accessible record of discussion.

# Open questions

> * As written, an individual stakeholder can block acceptance of an RFC indefinitely. In the Rust community, such an arrangement has sometimes caused problems, leading to a secondary process that kicks in after a waiting period, and requires an _additional_ stakeholder to approve continued blocking. Should we consider building in such a mechanism now, or add it to the process only if it becomes necessary later?

Reviewer 3: Let's discuss this on Monday, but my take is that we should see how things work for now, and apply remedies if and when we see symptoms of something going wrong.
